---
layout: post
title: Chitrakaavyas!
---

This is an edited version with exerpts from the talk given by [@suhasm](https://twitter.com/suhasm)

A lof of us love poetry (kaavya). Chitrakavya is a kind of poem written with constraints in addition to the existing contraints like meters, etc., due to which they always exceed a reader's expectations.

Imagine walking through a gallery of paintings, and I hope this gives you a similar experience.

It is tradition to start with an auspicious verse, and here's a chitrakaavya written by yours truly -

> ### <center>अरातिरातनोरात्त नारी तनुरनुत्तर: ।
> ### <center>तन्तनीतु त्रिनेत्रो निरार्तितां नो निरान्तरम् ॥
> ### <center>May three-eyed Shiva grant us good health. He is enemy of Love God, shares his body with Parvati as Ardhanarishvara, and is supreme.

If you haven't noticed yet, this contains only 3 consonants: **र**, **त** & **न**!

There can be other kinds of contraints too, and the results get increasingly interesting. Here's a verse which uses only 2 consonants - **र** & **त** - from [Vallabhadeva's *Subhashitavali (34,11)*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.70521/page/n39/mode/2up)

> ### <center>तारतारतरेरैतैरुत्तरोत्तरो रुतै: ।
> ### <center>रतार्ता तित्तिरी रौति तीरॆ तीरॆ तरौ तरौ ॥
> ### <center>The love-sick *tittiri* bird cries out on every bank, on every tree, again and againm growing shriller and shriller

The choice of these consonants is surely not a random one, for these are some of the most frequent ones in the Sanskrit lexicon, which is why, a similar attempt with the consonants **ट** / **ठ** / **ढ** / **घ** would not be an easy one, simply because there are not as many words with them. So, there's quite a lot of thought involved in creating one, and even with these calculations, it's certainly a challenge, nonetheless.

Now, Sanskrit takes this art-form to heights unknown in other languages, but we do come across such. Charles Carroll Bombaugh, in of his [selections of such whimsical works](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/56805/56805-h/56805-h.htm) full of alliterations, anagrams has a few *univocalic* verses - where only one syllable is used. e.g.

> ### No cool monsoons blow soft on Oxford dons,
> ### Orthodox, jog-trot, book-worm Solomons!
